Incorporate results from and since IETF 124 into the document (#22)
ietf-wg-asdf/instance-information: draft-bormann-asdf-instance-information.md

specific ecosystems, which tend to have rather different ways to
represent this information.

This document discusses types of Instance Information and defines

> Abstract (eco-system independent) Representation

Author: Two perspectives/requirements of the same abstract representation:
- _conceptual_ for the "model" of the messages
- _neutral_ (and concrete) for the actual interchange, ecosystem-independent but "real" ("red star")

> Abstract (eco-system independent) Representation

Author: Resolved via 594fb7b98e1d7cddd3f821644f79e62e637d446c.

# Instance Information and SDF

> The instantiation of an SDF model does not produce an instance, which is, for example, a physical device or a digital twin.

Reviewer: maybe

```suggestion
The instantiation of an SDF model does not directly express an instance, which is, for example, a physical device or a digital twin.
```

Instead, the instantiation produces an instance-related _message_, which adheres to a uniform message format and is always controlled by the corresponding SDF model.
Depending on the recipient and the purpose of the message, different fields of the message format are present, reporting different kinds of information related to a Thing or causing it to change the state of the Thing when consumed by the recipient.
Taking into account previous revisions of this document as well as {{-non-affordance}}, the potential use cases for instance-related messages indicate the following archetypes:

1. *Context snapshots* that only report context information about a Thing
2. *Proofshots* that report a Thing's state (or parts of it), which may include context information
3. *Delta messages* that indicate state changes compared to a previous context snapshot or proofshot message
4. *Patch messages* that cause a Thing's state to change

> 5. *Identity manifests* that report information related to a Thing's identity

Reviewer: Maybe we should collect all subset/variant proofshots under that headline

Author: You mean identity manifest?

6. *Construction messages* that initiate a Thing's (re)configuration or its comissioning

> These messages may be further clustered into the following three types:

Author: Yeah, that is a good point actually! So maybe we need to add in another level of "branching out" the message types.

<!-- TODO: The names need to be improved -->

1. *State reports*, both regarding affordances and context information (which includes information about a Thing's identity),
2. *State report updates*, indicating changes that have occurred since a reference state report, and
3. *State patches*, which include the original patch messages as well as construction messages

> The uniform message format can be used for all three message types.

Author: Would the following be an improvement of the sentence here:

```suggestion
The uniform message format serves as the basis for all three message types, which are distinguished via their media types as well as small syntactical differences.
```

{{{#syntax}}} specifies the formal syntax of instance-related messages all normative statements as well as the examples in this document will adhere to.

In the following, we will first outline a number of general principles for instance-related messages, before detailing the specific archetypes we define in this document.
The specification text itself will be accompanied by examples that have been inspired by {{-non-affordance}} and {{-digital-twin}}.

## Axioms for instance-related messages

> <!-- TODO: Integrate this into the document in a better way -->

Reviewer: I think for now capturing this is more important than nicely integrating it, so we may not want to tend to this TODO right away

Instance-related messages can be messages that relate to a property, action, or
event (input or output data), or they can be "proofshots" (extracted state
information, either in general or in the form of context snapshots etc.).

Instance-related messages are controlled by a *model*, which normally is the

> interaction model of the device (class-level information).

Reviewer: maybe move up "(class-level information)" to after *model*

That interaction model may provide a model of the interaction during which the
instance-related message is interchanged (at least conceptually), or it may be a
"built-in" interaction (such as a proofshot, a context snapshot, ...) that is
implicitly described by the entirety of the interaction model.
This may need to be augmented/composed in some way, as device modeling may be
separate from e.g. asset management system modeling or digital twin modeling.
Instance-related messages use JSON pointers into the model in order to link the
instance-related information to the model.

> Instance-related messages are conceptual and will often be mapped into

Reviewer: are/can be
abstract vs. conceptual

Taking into account previous revisions of this document as well as {{-non-affordance}}, we identified two main dimensions for covering the potential use cases for instance-related messages:
The intended effect of a message, which can either be the exposure or an update of a Thing's state;
and the actual content of the message, which may be freestanding (without a reference to a previous message or state) or relative (with such a reference).

Based on these considerations (as illustrated by the systematization in {{{#instance-message-dimensions}}}), we can identify the following four message archetypes:

<!-- TODO: The names probably need to be improved -->

1. *State reports* that may contain contain both affordance-related and context information, including information about a Thing's identity,
2. *Construction messages*, which trigger a Thing's initial configuration process or its commissioning,
3. *State report updates* that indicate changes that have occurred since a reference state report, and
4. *State patches* that update the Thing's state.

> 

Reviewer: "report" and "delta/patch" are about what the message is, structurally.
"configuration/construction message" are about what the message is intended to do, just as "delta" vs. "patch" are.
The (structurally) same message could be reported as a delta and then sent on as a patch.

Messages may have to be complemented by this context for
interpretation, i.e., the context needed may need to be reified in the
message (compare the use of SenML "n").
Information that enables interactions via application-layer protocols (such as an IP address) can also be considered context information.

For this purpose, we are using the `sdfContext` keyword introduced by {{-non-affordance}}.
Note that `sdfContext` _could_ also be modelled via `sdfProperty`

TODO: explain how {{RFC9039}} could be used to obtain device names (using `urn:dev:org` in the example).

# Message Format {#message-format}

> Instance-related messages share a number of structural features with SDF models regarding metadata and namespace information, but are also different in crucial aspects.

Author: Good point, would the following work as a clarification?

```suggestion
The data model of instance-related messages shares a number of structural features with SDF models (e.g., when it comes metadata and namespace information), but is also different in crucial aspects.
```

| $comment           | string           | Source code comments only, no semantics                            |
{: #infoblockqual title="Qualities of the Information Block"}

## Namespaces Block

Similar to SDF models, instance-related messages contain a namespaces block with a `namespace` map and the `defaultNamespace` setting.
In constrast to models, including a `namespace` quality is mandatory as at least one namespace reference is needed to be able to refer to the SDF model the instance-related message corresponds with.

| Quality          | Type   | Description                                                                                          |
|------------------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| namespace        | map    | Defines short names mapped to namespace URIs, to be used as identifier prefixes                      |
| defaultNamespace | string | Identifies one of the prefixes in the namespace map to be used as a default in resolving identifiers |
{: #nssec title="Namespaces Block"}

## Instance-of Block

> Destinct from SDF models are two instance-specific blocks, the first of which is identified via the `sdfInstanceOf` keyword.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distinct from SDF models are two instance-specific blocks, the first of which is identified via the `sdfInstanceOf` keyword.
```

| Quality          | Type   | Description                                                                                                                                                    |
|------------------|--------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| model            | string | Defines the entry point for `sdfInstance` by pointing to an `sdfObject` or an `sdfThing`. Has to be based on a namespace identifier from the `namespaces` map. |
| patchMethod      | string | Allows for overriding the default patch method (JSON Merge Patch) by providing a registered value.                                                             |
| $comment         | string           | Source code comments only, no semantics                                                                                                              |
{: #iobsec title="Instance-of Block"}

## Instance Block

In the instance block, state information for properties, actions, and events as well as context information can be included.

> Depending on the archetype, this information will either be used to report a Thing's current state, to report state _changes_, or to update state via a patch or reconfiguration.

Author: Oh, definitely, that is a good point :) I suppose we need to discuss how many new media types we actually need (three?) to reliably distinguish the different message/archetypes.

>     scimObjectId: 8988be82-50dc-4249-bed2-60c9c8797677

Reviewer: Hmm (marker for food for thought):
This says what specifically it is (an identifier for the Thing) and how it is represented in that specific ecosystem (as scimObjectId).
Do we want to disentangle this at some point?
Right now, a different ecosystem cannot detect that scimObjectId actually is an identifier for the Thing and from which ecosystem that is comint.

Here, every property and context definition of the corresponding SDF model
(see {{code-off-device-model}}) is mapped to a concrete value that corresponds

> with the associated schema information.

Author: Thank you, I tried to recapture it via 1cf3f68549a2da59019b33445c2d4c5774dbfbf1
